Access rules 
============

Grammar
-------

Each and every document stored in table documents can possess a set of access
rules. The rights occupy documents.accessrules text field, where each is a set
of individual rules, divided by a newline.

Each individual rule describes what particular rights are allocated to a given
entity, and can in general be described as 

   RULE := ENTITY can ACTION CAPABILITIES this document

where

   ENTITY        := USER | GROUP
   ACTION        := ONLY | ALSO | NOT | ALWAYS | NEVER
   CAPABILITIES  := one or more CAPABILITY
   CAPABILITY    := VIEW | CREATE | EDIT | PUBLISH | DELETE | CHANGE ACCESS | ADMINISTER

This way, the access rules mimic a human-readable description of rights a
person might have been exposes to, for example, 

  "User A can only view, edit and publish this document"

or,

  "Users from group B can not delete this document"

The access rules that are stored in database, in a human-readable form, but the
syntax is less relaxed, and the following encoding rules are used:

   USER    := users.login
   GROUP   := @groups.name

where users and groups are tables in the database, and.

   ONLY    := =
   ALSO    := +
   NOT     := -
   ALWAYS  := =!
   NEVER   := !

   CHANGE ACCESS := MODES
   ADMINISTER    := ADMIN

This way, the former statements about user A and group B could be rewritten in
the following way, assuming that users.login for the user A is "a" and
groups.name for the group B is "b":

   a=view,edit,publish
   @b-delete

The access rights are stored in this way in the database, and can be edited
directly by a text editor.

Precedence
----------

There can be defined more than access rule governing a particular action.  In
order to computer what access has a user to a particular document, all access
rules are scanned in order of their declaration. For example,

   a=view,edit,publish
   a-edit

means that user A can only view and publish. If user A is a member of group B,
then

   a=view,edit,publish
   @b-edit

is effectively the same. The rules can be added and revoked many times:

   a=view,edit,publish
   a-view,edit,publish
   a+edit

leaves user A capable of editing only.

Actions
-------

There are two type of actions, those that allow (ONLY,ALWAYS,ALSO) and those
that deny (NOT,NEVER) access. After the processing of individual rules, two
lists contain the capabilities the user is allowed and denied. The following
set of actions is defined:

ALSO: adds CAPABILITIES the allow list.

ONLY: removes all capabilities from the allow list and assigns CAPABILITIES the
allow list.

ALWAYS: same as ONLY, but also removed all capabilities from the deny list.

NOT: adds CAPABILITIES to the deny list.

NEVER: same as NOT but CAPABILITIES cannot be later removed or masked.

Inheritance
-----------

Each document has two integer fields, id and parent, where id is a unique
document identification, and parent is such the id of the document parent. In
such a way, the hierarchical structure of the document tree is declared, where
the first parent for all documents in the predeclared document with id 1. The
access rights can be also inherited from the access rights of parent documents.
If the set of access rules contains a special keyword INHERIT, then all access
rules from all parents of the documents are processed also. 

In addition to that, all documents unconditionally inherit access rules from
another predeclared document named "universal", which is only used for
declaration of such access rules. Although universal access rules can contain
the same rules that the other access rules can, it does only make sense to
declare strong negative rules that unconditionally deny rights using "!" (
NEVER ) that cannot be masked. Practically, this makes an effective tool for
quick temporary removal of access rights.

Editing
-------

Obvius provides dialog-based editing capability of of access rights.

The dialog consists of four panels: computed rules, universal rules, inherited
rules, and document rules.

The computed rules display all rules, - universal, inherited ( if applicable ),
and document rules, - and depending whether a particular rule is applicable or
not the currently accesses document, the rules are either displayed normally or
grayed out. This way, it is visually easier to discard rules that do not apply.

The universal rules display the set of access rules unconditionally imposed on
each document. The universal access rules themselves in turn can also be edited
in a similar fashion, from the main page under "Edit universal access rules"
link.

The inherited rules panel displays a set of access rules collected by
traversing the document inheritance tree, and features a check box which, if
pressed, actualizes these rules ( see INHERIT above ).

The document rules panel displays set of editable access rules, one line per
rule, and "Create" button. The "Create" button, if pressed, displays a dialog
where an individual rule can be composed, namely, either name of the user or
group can be selected, together with an appropriate action and set of
capabilities.

The created rules can also be edited ("Edit") and deleted ("Delete"). The
changes are not stored in the database until a green "Update" button is
pressed. This action also causes the recomputation of all access rules and
change of information in the computed rules panel.

The editing engine is based on Javascript v1.2, so in case the browser does not
support this version of the language, the panels are not shown, but rather a
simple text editor is displayed instead. In this case, the access rules must be
edited using the grammar described above.
